The sense of urgency regarding the implementation of culturally relevant teaching practices was highlighted by 80 faculty members and scholars at HBCUs, PWIs, and MSIs who responded to a survey I conducted in 2021. A principal theme emerged: faculty at PWIs are uncomfortable confronting Whiteness in design and practice, and express a lack of readiness to integrate such topics into their lectures. HBCU faculty, in contrast, are developing new course content and teaching methods that explore race and cultural biases, along with issues of gender inequality, social equity, diversity, and inclusion. One result of the survey was my recent article “Critical Race Theory as Architectural Pedagogy,” which goes beyond the DEI model to address structural inequalities in architecture, design, and planning programs. Too often, such programs fail to shed light not only on racism and gender biases both contemporary and historical, but on oppressive administrative and legal mechanisms, including educational systems in low-income communities, systemic segregation through zoning and redlining, and the lack of insurance coverage for people of color, to name a few. At Tuskegee University and a select few predominately White institutions, however, discussion of these issues and their effects are distributed through the architectural pedagogy.

Curricula operating at the intersections of architecture, race, and education promote design activism, and at Tuskegee we face cultural and social responsiveness head-on. In 2017, I initiated a visiting scholar program, co-taught with faculty, designers, and scholars from Dark Matter University, Columbia University, and large firms including Cooper Carry, Perkins+Will, and HOK. The visiting scholars program infuses culturally relevant teaching practices into design studios and into a new seminar course titled “Culturally Responsive Practices in Architecture” taught primarily by Roderick Fluker at Tuskegee University and Justin Garrett Moore at Columbia University; bringing together faculty at HBCUs and PWIs with designers in professional practice, we empower students from diverse backgrounds to share thoughts on integrating their cultural work and future professional lives. A related example of inventive pedagogy is being developed in Florida A&M University’s department of architecture, which offers a workshop for distance learning strategies taught in collaboration with faculty at the University of Oregon and Howard University. Such collaborations prove that, by bringing topics related to critical race theory into culturally relevant teaching practices, we can promote faculties’ ability to convene uncomfortable conversations and to critique societal and structural inequalities in architecture, design, and planning education.